This observation indicates one or more issues the PHD had attempting to take a measurement, for example, finger poorly positioned, cannot get a sufficiently strong signal, etc.

This example comes from a pulse oximeter when the sensor mechanism is having a set of difficulties. The set of difficulties are reported by setting a bit respresenting the issue in an integer. Since HL7 does not support this kind of measurement, the bit settings are converted to codes for FHIR using the ASN1ToHL7 code system. In this case the codes have value 150604.x where x is the MDER bit representing a given condition and '150604' is the MDC code describing the measurement. '150604' is a device and sensor status measurement. In this case, 5 of the 16 possible flags are set. All of the bits in this measurement are events thus they are only *required* to be reported when set (values are `true` in FHIR).

The source of the ASN1 names comes from the IEEE 11073-11404 (pulse Oximeter) specialization standard where this measurement is described in detail.

The PHD does not send timestamps with its measurements therefore the timestamp is the time of reception by the PHG and there is no coincident timestamp Observation.

Note there is no need for a logical id in this resource when this resource is being uploaded to the server in a create operation. The server will create the logical id and return it to the sender in the response. There is also no reference to the coincident timestamp since this observation is generated by a device that is streaming data and reporting no timestamp. The timestamp is taken to be the time of reception by the gateway.

The logical id in the example is present due to limitations of the publishing process.